Institutional Reforms for Human
Development: Panchayat Raj

CHAPTER 11

Institutional Reforms for Human
Development: Panchayat Raj
Introduction
The Government of Karnataka, as part of its strategy
of promoting human development, has undertaken
several institutional reforms. One area where it
undertook this task early is decentralisation of
governance and planning. Basically, institutional
reform of this kind is a way of ensuring
grassroots participation, greater transparency and
accountability and responsiveness to local needs.
If this combination works, then people are assured
of efficient service delivery and better human
development outcomes.

Evolution of local government
in Karnataka
In the erstwhile princely state of Mysore, the
idea of local self-governance emerged as early
as 1874, with the establishment of ‘local fund
committees’ in each district, for taking up
construction of roads and subsidiary works. But
these committees did not evoke local interest
and initiative because of the dominance of the
official members. The Mysore Local Boards Act of
1902, which sought to correct this shortcoming,
provided for a three-tier local self-government
structure consisting of the village panchayat with a
nominated chairman, a taluk board with the subdivision officer as president and a district board
with the Deputy Commissioner as president. Since
even these measures did not lessen the hold of
the bureaucracy, the Mysore Local Boards and
Village Panchayat Act was enacted in 1918 to
provide for elected members and elected vice
presidents at these levels. In 1926, the Mysore
District and Mysore Village Panchayats Act was
enacted, providing panchayats with adequate
powers, finances and resources, and eliminating
taluk boards from the system. All these measures
were intended to loosen the hold of bureaucrats
and to induct people’s representatives into local
government.

During the early 1950s there were further
attempts to make these institutions people
oriented and more representative. The Mysore
Village Panchayats and Local Boards Act, 1959
was enacted, within the broad framework of
the Balwanthrai Mehta Committee Report, to
provide for village panchayats, taluk development
boards and district development councils. The
first two bodies were wholly elected and the
last was a coordinating body with nominated
members and people’s representatives and district
level government officials. The Panchayat Raj
institutions (PRIs) under the 1959 Act provided
a viable politico-administrative structure, which
had been so far absent.The Act made provision for
reservation for women and the Scheduled Castes
(SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) to the elected
bodies but it did not bestow sufficient attention on
the question of financial autonomy. A field level
study (N. Sivanna, 1990) noted that the system
threw up a power structure, which reflected the
one that obtained in rural Karnataka.
The Ashok Mehta Committee, which submitted
its report in 1978, sought a more comprehensive
role for Panchayat Raj institutions such that
they would ‘undertake democratic development
management under conditions of rapid changes,
continuous growth and sustained innovations in
all spheres of rural life’ (Government of India,
1978:77). The Karnataka Legislature then
enacted the Karnataka Zilla Parishads, Taluk
Panchayat Samithis, Mandal Panchayats and
Nyaya Panchayats Act in 1983, which established
a new PR structure consisting of mandal
panchayats at the village level, taluk panchayat
samithis and zilla parishads. These institutions
apart, the Act provided for a gram sabha (village
assembly) which comprised all eligible voters of
a given mandal panchayat, panchayat members
and government officers who were expected

Decentralisation of
governance and planning
is a way of ensuring
grassroots participation,
greater transparency
and accountability and
responsiveness to local
needs. If this combination
works, then people are
assured of efficient service
delivery and better human
development outcomes.

255

Institutional Reforms for Human Development: Panchayat Raj

to use the forum to (i) discuss and review all
development problems and programmes of the
village; (ii) select beneficiaries for beneficiary
oriented programmes; and (iii) plan for the
development of the village economy and its
people which included minimum needs, welfare
and production oriented activities. The gram
sabha was conceived as a space that provided an
opportunity to the people to voice their needs and
aspirations; it was also to be a platform where
the elected representatives and the bureaucrats
were made accountable to the people for their
actions and to serve as a means of ensuring
transparency in administration.

The gram sabha was
conceived as a space
that provided an
opportunity to the people
to voice their needs and
aspirations; it was also to
be a platform where the
elected representatives
and the bureaucrats were
made accountable to the
people for their actions
and to serve as a means
of ensuring transparency
in administration.

The decentralised system that was put in place
under the 1983 Act was really radical, in the
sense, that many powers were devolved to the
people to govern themselves and to promote
local development. It made the PR bureaucracy
accountable to the people’s representatives,
rather than the state bureaucracy. There
was substantial reservation for women and
backward classes. People’s participation in local
government was enabled by holding gram sabhas,
which were mandatorily convened twice a year.
Here the citizens reviewed the activities of the
mandal governments, selected the beneficiaries
under various anti-poverty programmes and
development projects, and made decisions
about project selection and community
participation.
Studies on the performance of these PRIs,
identified certain shortcomings. While the
reservation policy gave women, the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes and backward
castes representation in local bodies, they did not
occupy positions of leadership such as Pradhan in
the mandal panchayat or Adhyaksha of the zilla
parishad. Members of the dominant communities
wrested these positions due to their control of
rural society (Amal Ray and K. Jayalakshmi,
October, 1987; A. Aziz, 1994). Second, with the
assigning of the Jawahar Rozgar Yojana funds
and with improved revenue collections the PRIs’
financial status improved, but they still suffered
from lack of financial autonomy because they
continued to depend overwhelmingly on grants

256

from the state government. The quantum of
discretionary grants available to them was
minimal. Third, the panchayats did better in
some areas than in others. The evaluation
committee which reviewed the performance of
PRIs testified to the good performance of PRIs,
(Government of Karnataka, 1989) whereas
other studies showed that most of the projects
implemented were construction oriented; i.e. the
construction of, and repairs to, buildings, roads,
bridges, rather than production oriented (A. Aziz,
1993; A. Aziz, 1994; and Planning Department,
Government of Karnataka, 1987). Finally,
the PR bodies did not have any constitutional
safeguards or permanence. Consequently, with
the completion of the first five-year term in
January 1992, elections to these institutions
were not held; instead, they were superseded
and administrators appointed to carry out the
functions of the PRIs. The 73rd Amendment to
the Constitution gave constitutional guarantees
to PRIs of elections, guarantees against the state
superseding Panchayat Raj (PR) bodies, seat
and authority position reservation for the weaker
sections, financial devolution on a scientific basis,
and so on. Following this, many states, including
Karnataka, passed new Panchayat Raj Acts
conforming to the provisions of the Constitution
Amendment Act.

The current scenario
Attempts have been made in recent times
to strengthen PRIs by adopting measures to
promote good governance and accountability
through ‘enhanced people’s participation, citizen
orientation, responsiveness, improved service
delivery, improved financial management and
greater downward accountability’ (RDPR,
Government of Karnataka, 17.5.2004). The
Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 was amended
in October 2003 and the 47 amendments thus
effected were intended to facilitate people’s
participation and to make PRIs more accountable
to their constituents. Conceptually, gram sabhas
provide a space for grassroots participation. In
reality, their functioning has often been neither
democratic nor participatory. The poor, women,
the SCs and STs remained marginalised and
voiceless.

Karnataka Human Development Report 2005

To ensure greater and more effective participation,
the amendments provide for the ward/vasathi
sabha in each constituency of the gram panchayat
(GP) with mandatory powers to identify and
prioritise beneficiaries, approve development
plans, generate project proposals, and identify
deficiencies in rural amenities.
A significant step taken in the direction of carrying
decentralisation forward is the Belur Declaration
adopted in January 2004.This declaration lists the
steps to be taken by the authorities concerned to
strengthen the gram panchayat by appropriately
devolving powers, functions and funds, by
equipping them with technical and managerial
capabilities and by ensuring transparency and
accountability in its functions.
Karnataka is ahead of many states in terms
of the powers and functions that have been
delegated to PRIs. An analysis will reveal the
extent to which the PRIs have managed delivery
systems efficiently; ensured transparency and
accountability; and taken decision-making
to the grassroots. The following aspects of
decentralisation will be examined: (i) devolution
of powers, functions, functionaries and funds;
(ii) creation of a participatory environment through
reservation of seats and authority positions;
(iii) community participation especially
participation of people’s organisations and
NGOs; and (iv) decentralised governance and
planning.
Under the 1993 Act, the panchayats shall
function in accordance with the principle that
what is appropriate at a given level should not
be done at a higher level. The 29 functions listed
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, and
devolved to panchayats were delineated in three
separate schedules, each of which was applicable
to the gram panchayat (GP), taluk panchayat (TP)
and zilla panchayat (ZP) respectively.The functions
include preparation of annual plans and annual
budgets; preparation of sectoral development
schemes to promote agriculture, animal
husbandry, rural housing, drinking water, roads
and bridges, rural electrification, education, public
health, sanitation, women and child development,

BOX 11.1

Imparting transparency and accountability in PRI functioning
Certain other provisions impart greater transparency and accountability to the functioning of
PRIs: (i) TP and ZP members must declare their assets and furnish accounts of election expenses;
(ii) all panchayat members must disclose their pecuniary interest, if any, in panchayat dealings;
(iii) meeting proceedings must be displayed within 72 hours on the GP notice board along with
the names of members voting for or against the resolutions passed; (iv) all panchayats must
make available details of works undertaken and expenditures incurred, receipts of funds etc;
(v) bills of works undertaken in the GP area by TPs and ZPs will be cleared only after the GP
concerned certifies that the works have been satisfactorily completed; and (vi) attendance of
officials at GP meetings is mandatory.

social welfare, maintenance of community assets,
promotion of libraries and so on. More powers
and functions were devolved in 2004-05 and
in order to remove ambiguity, a detailed activity
map was prepared for each of the three panchayat
tiers. Certain distortions and ambiguities noticed
at the implementation level were sought to be
removed by rationalising or merging schemes.
Such rationalisation has resulted in the reduction
of schemes from 421 to 217.This means that PRIs
are now less constrained and straitjacketed by the
normal plethora of department schemes, each
with a set of inflexible guidelines that clamped a
tight hold on expenditure and left little room for
innovation or flexibility.

Principles of fiscal devolution
Since the decentralised governments are
required to perform several devolved functions,
and perform those functions efficiently, the
funds devolved to them ought also to be
adequate. Under Article 243-1 of the 73rd
Constitution Amendment Act, the State
Finance Commissions (SFCs) are empowered
to determine the quantum of state resources
to be devolved to panchayats and urban local
governments. Theoretically speaking, transfer
of resources from the state government to
decentralised governments can take two forms:
general purpose and specific purpose grants.
The former is meant to offset fiscal disabilities
arising from inabilities to locally raise adequate
resources to provide the needed infrastructure
at levels compared to those in richer regions,
so as to utilise the growth potential available

PRIs are now less
constrained and
straitjacketed by the
normal plethora of
department schemes, each
with a set of inflexible
guidelines that clamped a
tight hold on expenditure
and left little room for
innovation or flexibility.

257

Institutional Reforms for Human Development: Panchayat Raj

While the state
government broadly
accepted the first SFC
recommendations on
the quantum of funds
devolution to panchayats,
it did not do so with
regard to the allocation
criteria and continued to
follow the modified Gadgil
formula, on the ground
that the latter was better
placed for ensuring social
justice.

258

in the poorer regions and to promote higher
growth rates there. On the other hand, the
specific purpose grants are meant to ensure
that categorical equity or ‘wealth neutral’
services (unrelated to ability to pay) such as
education, health and sanitation, rural roads
etc. are provided in adequate quantities
(M. Govinda Rao). The First Karnataka State
Finance Commission arrived at a figure of
36 per cent of the non-plan gross own
revenue receipts of the state government to
be devolved to panchayats and urban local
self-governments (Government of Karnataka,
January 1996). This is an improvement over
the 34.3 per cent in vogue and amounted to
Rs.2,675 crore during 1996-97. The Second
Karnataka State Finance Commission hiked this
figure to 40 per cent. As for sharing this amount
between panchayats and urban local bodies
(ULBs) the First Commission recommended a
share of 30.4 per cent to the former and 5.6
per cent to the latter; the recommendation of
the Second Commission was 32 per cent and
8 per cent respectively. As for the allocation of
this amount across different tiers of panchayats,
the Commission recommended a ratio of
40:35:25 to zilla panchayats, taluk panchayats
and gram panchayats respectively. Under this
allocation scheme, gram panchayats would
have gained greatly because the proportion
going to them at that time was estimated to
be only 13 per cent of the devolved funds. The
criteria and the weightage suggested by the
First Commission for allocating funds across
panchayats within each tier were: population
(33.3 per cent), area (33.3 per cent), and
backwardness seen in terms of road length,
hospital beds and illiteracy (33.3 per cent). This
formula marked a departure from the modified
Gadgil formula followed since 1987, when
the Commission introduced a new criterion in
the form of area in addition to population and
backwardness. The Second Commission, while
retaining those criteria, replaced roads by the
proportion of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
Tribe population under the third criterion. The
allocative formula was changed to 30 per cent
each to the first two criteria and to 40 per cent
for backwardness. Incidentally, while the state

government broadly accepted the first SFC
recommendations on the quantum of funds
devolution to panchayats, it did not do so with
regard to the allocation criteria and continued
to follow the modified Gadgil formula, on the
ground that the latter was better placed for
ensuring social justice.

Human development and fiscal
devolution
An analysis of fiscal decentralisation in
Karnataka by Rao, Amar Nath and Vani
(2004)1 identifies certain features of fiscal
decentralisation to rural local governments that
impact on human development expenditures.
Formally, Karnataka has transferred all the
functions listed in the schedule to the local
governments, but several are exercised
concurrently with the state government. The
Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 lists 31
functional items to gram panchayats, 28 items
to taluk panchayats and 29 items to zilla
panchayats. The actual assignment, however,
involved transferring a number of schemes
included in the plan – to constitute the
‘District Sector’ plans – to ZPs, TPs and GPs
for implementation. The employees of various
line departments in the state were transferred
to the district sector to implement these
programmes. To ensure that they continue
to enjoy the same powers and to undertake
the same functions, the expenditure functions
were devolved in terms of schemes, with the
condition that the local governments could
not scrap any of the schemes, and salary was
given priority in expenditure implementation.
In terms of adequacy and reach, the volume of
spending assigned to rural local governments
continues to be low. While the state government
has transferred the functions and the functionaries
to panchayats, the hardening fiscal situation
has restricted the devolution of funds. Based

1

Rao, Govinda, M., Amar Nath, H.K. and Vani, B. P (2004), ‘Fiscal
Decentralisation in Karnataka’, in Sethi, Geeta (ed.), Fiscal
Decentralisation to Rural Governments in India, the World Bank,
Oxford University Press.

Karnataka Human Development Report 2005

on the information in the Link Document2, the
estimated expenditure by panchayats was 21.8
per cent of the state’s expenditures or about
5 per cent of GSDP in 2001-02. Of this, an
overwhelming proportion was incurred for nonplan purposes. Plan expenditure was estimated
at 38 per cent in 2001-02 and was lower at
27.4 per cent in 2002-03. In most sectors, the
resources were just adequate to pay the salaries
of the employees and the greatest proportion of
expenditures at panchayat level was accounted
for by spillover schemes from the previous plans
and other salary and maintenance expenditures.
Furthermore, the role of the grassroot tier – the
GP - was negligible. Allocation to GPs constituted
just about five per cent of total district sector
outlays and a little over one per cent of state
outlay. This changed only in 2005, when many
schemes were delegated to gram panchayats.
The distribution of resources across different
districts is not based on actual needs. It must be
noted that a significant proportion of assigned
functions to the rural local governments relates to
human development. As functions, functionaries
and finances are devolved in terms of various
schemes, the distribution of funds to various
districts is not based on the requirements, but
is historically pre-determined and those districts
with good infrastructure and have big budgets

continue to receive higher transfers. There is little
scope, in this pattern, to focus on the deprived
districts in allocating resources. This has resulted
in the persistence of sharp variations in human
development outcomes among different districts.
Devolution to local bodies is the easiest component
of expenditure compression.The state government
has tried to contain the expenditure growth under
the fiscal adjustment programmes initiated in
2002-03, mainly by restricting plan expenditures.
As a result, the share of plan allocation by rural
local governments in total state expenditures was
reduced from 8.3 per cent in 2001-02 to 5.1 per
cent in 2002-03 and the share of plan allocation
to rural local bodies in the state’s Annual Plan
outlay declined from 27.8 per cent to 18.1 per
cent during the year. In fact, the district sector
plan outlay declined throughout the 1990s, from
2.5 per cent of GSDP in 1990-91 to 1.6 per cent
in 2001-02. As a ratio of total state expenditure,
the decline was from 40 per cent to 18 per cent
during the period (Figure 11.1). Thus, there has
been a steady erosion in the assistance given
to rural local governments for developmental
spending during the last decade, which was
reversed only in 2005-06.

There has been a
steady erosion in the
assistance given to rural
local governments for
developmental spending
during the last decade,
which was reversed only
in 2005-06.

The various tiers of local rural governance in
Karnataka are characterised by a plethora of

FIGURE 11.1

Plan expenditures of rural local governments
Percentage of State Plan Expenditure

45.0
40.0
35.0
30.0
25.0

Total District Sector

20.0
15.0
State Plan

10.0

Central schemes

5.0
0.0

1

0-9

199

2

1-9

199

3

2-9

199

-94

3
199

-95

4
199

-96

5
199

-97

6
199

8

7-9

199

0
2
1
3
9
8-9
200 000-0 001-0 002-0
2
2
2
199 1999-

Years

2

Link document is the document prepared by the state government listing the various schemes implemented by ZPs, TPs, and GPs. The
allocation reported in the document refers to budget estimates.

259

Institutional Reforms for Human Development: Panchayat Raj

The Achilles’ heel of
decentralised government
is taxation. Decentralised
governmental units, on
their part, have not taken
a proactive role, either
in raising the resources
to increase allocation to
social sector expenditures,
or in increasing the
effectiveness of spending
programmes by improving
the delivery systems.

260

schemes on the one hand, and concentration
of outlay in only a few schemes on the other.
Although there were over 371 plan and
228 non-plan schemes in 2001-02, only a
handful of schemes contributed to the bulk
of expenditures. Among the state sector plan
schemes implemented in TPs, the pre-school
children feeding programme was the most
important. On the non-plan side, disbursement
of school teachers’ salaries and providing grants
to schools accounted for 80 per cent of the nonplan outlay in TPs. In the ZPs too, a handful
of schemes were important. On the plan side,
piped water supply, family welfare centres and
PHCs, SGRY, SGSY, rural sub-centres for family
welfare and DPAP accounted for 55 per cent of
the plan outlay on Central schemes in 200203. On the non-plan side, grants disbursed to
the non-government secondary schools alone
accounted for about a third of expenditures in
the ZPs.

Discretionary funds
Does rural fiscal decentralisation in Karnataka
empower local governments to provide public
services according to the preferences of their
residents? The disaggregated analysis of the
outlay on 30 major schemes implemented
by the rural local governments shows that
they hardly have any leeway or autonomy
in determining their allocation priorities. Of
the total outlay, 58 per cent is earmarked for
salaries, 11 per cent is simply transferred as
grants-in-aid to institutions and 10 per cent is
required to be spent on transfer payments to
persons. Another 16 per cent is earmarked for
specified schemes. This leaves the panchayats
absolute discretion over only five per cent of
the outlay. In respect of another 16 per cent
of the outlay, they have limited autonomy.
However, here too, the panchayats have the
choice to determine the allocation between
various input purchases within the schemes,
but cannot change total allocation from the
scheme. This suggests that the nature of fiscal
decentralisation will have to change to enable
PRIs to address area-specific needs in a more
focused way.

The general complaint of the panchayat leaders,
especially in GPs, is that the funds devolved are
not commensurate with the needs of the people
and monies sanctioned to them are not released in
time to carry out development works. Untied grants
to GPs have increased significantly over the years.
Gram panchayats were initially given an annual
grant of Rs.1,00,000 in 1993, Rs.2,00,000 in
1999, Rs.3,50,000 in 2000, which was raised to
Rs.5,00,000 in 2003. At present, they continue
to get grants from the Centre under SGRY and
under the Eleventh National Finance Commission
recommendations. Now this grant comes to about
Rs.7,50,000 per annum per gram panchayat
and will increase in 2005, with more schemes
being delegated to PRIs. In 2005-06, the District
Sector Plan outlay shot up to Rs.2,002.89 crore
from Rs.939.71 crore in 2004-05. The state
government now directly releases its grants to the
gram panchayats through banks, which makes the
releases transparent and less liable to leak during
transmission.3 Rationalisation of schemes and
transfer of more schemes to PRIs will offer more
autonomy to PRIs.

Gram panchayats and resource
mobilisation
The Achilles’ heel of decentralised government is
taxation. Decentralised governmental units, on
their part, have not taken a proactive role, either
in raising the resources to increase allocation
to social sector expenditures, or in increasing
the effectiveness of spending programmes by
improving the delivery systems. The ZPs and
TPs do not have revenue-raising powers and
they function as de-concentrated agencies of
the state government in disbursing the salaries
of teachers and health workers. At the same
time, the GPs spend just about six per cent of
the total expenditures incurred by the rural local
governments, and thus, have a negligible role in
providing social services impacting on human
development. To be sure, they play some role in
water supply and sanitation and in implementing
the SGRY, but the resources available with the GPs
3

Surprisingly, when the Centre decided to directly release its
grants to panchayats some state governments opposed the
move!

Karnataka Human Development Report 2005

for water supply are meagre and in the poorer
districts of northern Karnataka, which also have
water scarcity, the problem is acute. Their inability
to raise resources from the sources assigned to
them adds to the problem of inadequate resource
transfer from the state government. The GPs
implement 50 per cent of the outlay on SGRY, and
to that extent, they play their part in implementing
poverty alleviation programmes.
One reason for the relatively minor role of rural
local governments in human development is
their poor record of raising revenues from own
sources.The ZPs and TPs do not have independent
revenue raising powers, so they merely implement
the schemes designed by the state or the Central
government. Only the GPs have revenue raising
powers, but in 2000-01, they raised only
Rs.16.2 crore, or 0.08 per cent of the Gross
District Domestic Product (GDDP), which in turn,
constituted 22 per cent of the total revenues of
the GPs. The taxes and rates assigned to gram
panchayats are house tax, non-motorable vehicle
tax, factory tax, entertainment tax other than
cinema halls, water tax, licence fee, fee on fairs,
and so on. Except property tax, the other taxes
assigned are not productive, nor are they elastic;

and the panchayats are too close to the people
to be able to collect taxes and rates efficiently.
Both the design and implementation of property
tax need to be improved. Though potentially
lucrative, the tax suffers from a poor and outdated
valuation system and the GPs do not have the
administrative or enforcement capacity to raise
significant revenues from the tax. GPs have been
able to collect only 69 per cent of the amount due
and the cost of collection of the tax is estimated
at 72 per cent. In as many as 42 per cent of the
panchayats, the cost of tax collection was found to
be higher than the revenue collected. A significant
effort will have to be made to strengthen the
administrative and enforcement capacity of the
GPs to raise more revenues from the sources
assigned to them, to enable these grassroot level
governments to play a meaningful role in human
development.
The state government took certain initiatives in
2003 to help gram panchayats: (i) guidelines
standardising rules for collection of property tax
were issued; (ii) a process was set in motion for
evaluation of tax that was transparent, and allowed
people to participate in the tax determination
process; (iii) property lists were publicised and

Only the GPs have revenue
raising powers, but in
2000-01, they raised only
Rs.16.2 crore, or
0.08 per cent of the Gross
District Domestic Product,
which in turn, constituted
22 per cent of the total
revenues of the GPs.

TABLE 11.1

Revenue and expenditure pattern of PRIs (all tiers): Selected states, 1997-98
(Per cent)
States

Tax and non-tax revenue

Expenditure on core services

All states

3.5

7.4

Andhra Pradesh

5.8

16.1

Karnataka

0.8

9.8

Gujarat

1.8

0.7

Kerala

10.1

11.9

Madhya Pradesh

1.8

3.2

Maharashtra

3.4

7.4

Punjab*

39.8

24.5

Tamil Nadu

8.1

33.4

West Bengal

4.0

0.4

Rajasthan

2.0

0.8

Note: * For Punjab, total resources are low, i.e. just about Rs.135.4 crore, as compared to Karnataka’s Rs.3,768 crore. In the former,
non-tax revenue is more than tax revenue as against the reverse situation in the latter.
Source: Report of the Eleventh Finance Commission, 2000-05, Government of India, New Delhi, 2000, Annexure VIII.2A, pp 227-31.

261

Institutional Reforms for Human Development: Panchayat Raj

put on the GP notice board for inspection. The
outcome of this initiative was that there was a
30 per cent increase in the number of properties
enumerated and the GP tax demand more than
doubled from Rs.80.6 crore to Rs.197.5 crore
(RDPR, Government of Karnataka, 17.5.2004:
8). It is now the turn of the gram panchayats to
improve tax mobilisation.

The state has been
implementing social
legislations and
development programmes
for equity and social
justice for decades, but
their effectiveness and
reach were affected by the
fact that the poor and the
vulnerable did not have
access to political power.

Table 11.1 depicts the actual picture of the
resource mobilisation of the Panchayat Raj
institutions that existed in 1997-98, based on the
data of the Eleventh Finance Commission. Perhaps
one may even hypothesise that mobilisation of
resources would be more effective since the local
governments are closer to people, but the actual
picture is something different. The revenue that
comes from taxes and other sources is only 3.5
per cent at the all-India level. For Karnataka it is
only 0.8 per cent. Among the states, Punjab has a
high proportion (39.8) of tax & non tax revenue,
perhaps because of the small size of resources, i.e.
only Rs.135 crore.

The social base of governance
The state has been implementing social legislations
and development programmes for equity and

social justice for decades, but their effectiveness
and reach were affected by the fact that the poor
and the vulnerable did not have access to political
power. It is now recognised that the marginalised
and the poor must have access to various political
fora to articulate their problems and grievances.
Participation in a grassroots political process is
likely to provide greater opportunities to such
persons to aspire to political power and authority,
through which they can also upgrade the social
and economic status of other members of their
caste/gender.
Political representation to the disadvantaged
castes such as the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes has been guaranteed by the
principle of ‘reservation’. However, there was
no representation for the backward castes
and women until the 1983 Act addressed that
need, by providing reservation in seats and
authority positions, not only to SCs and STs,
but also to women and backward castes. The
seat and authority position matrix is: (i) for SCs
and STs in proportion to their population or a
minimum of 18 per cent, (ii) 33.3 per cent for
other backward castes, and, more significantly,
(iii) one third for women from each of these

TABLE 11.2

Own revenue and expenditure pattern of village panchayats:
Some selected states, 1997-98
(Per cent)
States

Tax and non-tax revenue

Expenditure on core services

All states

10.1

10.7

Andhra Pradesh

38.7

33.1

Karnataka

33.8

28.0

Gujarat

12.9 (13.2)*

23.5 (19.5)*

Kerala

13.3

16.3

Madhya Pradesh

4.0

3.6

Maharashtra

20.6

17.5

Punjab*

45.6

31.6

Tamil Nadu

1.7

0.0

West Bengal

9.2

0.92

Rajasthan

5.1

NA

Note: * for 1993-94.
Source: Report of the Eleventh Finance Commission 2000-05, Government of India, New Delhi,2000, Annexure VIII.2B, pp 232-36.

262

Karnataka Human Development Report 2005

TABLE 11.3

castes, including the non-reserved seats. This
measure has roped in a large number of men
and women from the various deprived caste
groups, and, has thereby, widened the social
base of governance in rural as well as urban
society. Thus, in respect of panchayats, well
over 60 per cent of the membership comprises
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other
backward castes. Women’s representation is
considerably higher, exceeding their quota of
reservation. The elections held in 2000 returned
44.9 per cent, 42.2 per cent and 38.9 per cent
of women in GPs, TPs and ZPs respectively
(Table 11.3).
It is noteworthy that the proportion of these
sections increases as one moves down from the
upper to the lower tiers of panchayats, which
is appropriate, considering that these sections
participate more actively in the lower governance
levels, where decision-making on the public
service delivery takes place more intensively.
This system of reservation has brought into the
local governance system a large proportion of first
time/first generation representatives from hitherto
unrepresented social groups. Though this is a
welcome development, it has meant that certain
gender and caste stereotypes have become visible
and are seen quite wrongly as ‘constraints’. One
such stereotype is that ‘women are alien to politics
and governance’. The ‘belief’ represents no truth,
only the reluctance of existing power structures
to acknowledge and welcome social and political
restructuring in the wake of the 1983 and 1993
Acts. The reservation of seats and authority
positions to various social groups has widened
the social base of political decision-making at the
decentralised governance level, thus, promoting
participatory governance.

People’s participation in
decision-making
The Act provides all the mechanisms necessary
to ensure that the bodies are representative and
their functioning is participatory. Good governance
would imply, among other things, an efficient
delivery system; one, which is responsive to the
needs and aspirations of citizens and addresses
these needs with the least amount of leakage.

Distribution of elected panchayat members by category:
1994 and 2000
(Per cent)
Category

1994

2000

ZP

TP

GP

Total

ZP

TP

GP

Total

All (Nos.)

919

3340

80627

84886

890

3255

78740

82885

SCs and STs

23.1

23.1

31.6

31.18

23.8

25.4

26.7

26.6

OBC

33.3

33.4

33.3

33.3

33.6

33.6

33.8

33.8

Others

43.6

43.5

35.1

35.5

42.6

41.0

39.5

39.6

All male

63.5

59.8

56.2

56.4

61.1

57.8

55.1

55.3

All female

36.5

40.2

43.8

43.6

38.9

42.2

44.9

44.7

The question that arises next is about the kind
of needs and programmes that are identified, and
implemented. A study4 has found that projects can
be grouped in three categories, viz. (i) social and
economic infrastructure projects such as school and
hospital buildings, roads, bridges, irrigation tanks,
and so on; (ii) civic amenities such as drinking
water, drainage and street lights, community
buildings, bus shelters and shopping centres; and
(iii) sectoral development projects, such as projects
that promote agriculture, forestry, village industries,
horticulture etc. Amenities take priority because of
public demand. However, the preferred projects are
construction oriented such as buildings, culverts
and roads. Sectoral development projects and
industries have not received adequate attention
from PRIs. Explanations offered by Panchayat Raj
functionaries for their preference for construction
oriented projects are: (i) these are the projects
which the people themselves ask for and (ii) the
panchayats must show ‘visible’ evidence of having
met people’s needs, and hence, construction takes
precedence over projects with long gestation
periods or less visible outcomes such as capacity
building. Construction projects lend themselves to
leakage and there are reports of PRI members who
have become contractors and bid for contracts.

Reservation has
brought into the local
governance system a
large proportion of first
time/first generation
representatives from
hitherto unrepresented
social groups.

Granting that corruption does obtain under the
decentralised government system – and there
seems to be no evidence to the contrary – is it still

4

Study by Abdul Aziz, at al 2002.

263

Institutional Reforms for Human Development: Panchayat Raj

The primary objective of
decentralised planning
by PRIs is the promotion
of rural development by
identifying local needs
and prioritising activities.

more cost efficient compared to the centralised
governance system? One writer says that it is more
expensive because the decentralised governance
system fails to internalise the negative externality
of one bribe transaction on another because of
two reasons: (i) there is absence of social audit
by people and their organisations; and (ii) the
interlocking social and economic relationships
that obtain in rural society, and the existence of
small proximate groups in the villages, enable
the panchayat functionaries to easily manage
the risk of being caught (P. Bardhan, 1996). The
Government intends to address some of these
issues by establishing offices of Ombudsmen in the
districts and strengthening the public grievance
machinery.

food grains under the programme and this has
augmented the funds available to the GPs and
increased their capacity to plan; (ii) the Swachha
Grama programme launched in April 2001 with
90 per cent government funding, which has
enabled GPs to prioritise rural sanitation which
is inadequate in all villages; (iii) the Jal Nirmal
programme (June 2002) with 85 per cent
state funding is GP-centric from concept to
execution; (iv) the Jalasamrakshana programme
(August 2002), a cost sharing project between
the state and the beneficiary, managed by the
GP; (v) under the Sarva Kutumba Sameekshe
(November 2003), GPs conducted a house-tohouse survey and created a database that will
be useful for monitoring human development
indicators.

Decentralised planning
The primary objective of decentralised planning
by PRIs is the promotion of rural development by
identifying local needs and prioritising activities.
Institutional support for local level planning,
such as district level planning units and the basic
guidelines for carrying out planning activities
have been provided. The taluk panchayats and
gram panchayats have no institutional support
for planning and monitoring, and this should be
provided as early as possible.
The Central and state governments have taken
many initiatives to strengthen planning at the
grassroot level. They are: (i) the merger of JGSY
and EAS to create SGRY. The cash allocation
is supplemented by an equivalent quantity of
BOX 11.2

Evaluation of Panchayat Raj system
The National Eleventh Finance Commission has evaluated the Panchayat Raj system in the
country by using ten parameters and constructing an index of decentralisation. The parameters
used in the construction of the index of decentralisation are: (i) enactment/amendment of state
panchayat/municipal legislation; (ii) intervention/restriction in the functioning of the local bodies;
assignment of functions to the local bodies by state legislation; (iii) actual transfer of functions
to these bodies by way of rules, notifications and orders; (iv) assignment of powers of taxation
to local bodies and the extent of exercise of such powers; (v) constitution of the State Finance
Commissions and the extent of action taken on their reports; (vi) election to the local bodies; and
(vii) constitution of District Planning Committees. In terms of these parameters, Karnataka ranks
among the top states in the country.

264

These recent initiatives by the state will
undoubtedly augment the funds available to gram
panchayats and strengthen their capacity to plan at
the grassroot level; especially since planning and
implementation have been a mixed experience so
far. Often, inputs for planning are not obtained
from the people, and it is the panchayat members
and officials who supply inputs in the gram sabha
meetings. Consequently, development plans
prepared by the panchayats turn out to be plans
made by officials and members for the people,
and not plans of the people prepared by the
people. Some panchayats have ensured people’s
participation at the stage of implementation of
projects through special committees, and projects
are completed efficiently and in time. In other
panchayats, where people are not involved,
implementation of projects is inefficient and not
cost-effective.
The District Sector Plan is supposed to be a
blend of plans emanating from Panchayat
Raj institutions and urban local bodies. The
integration of plans from all the tiers does not
always result in a seamless document, and
instead, a jumble of projects with no time or
project connectivity is produced. District Planning
Committees need capacity building if they are to
function effectively as nodal planning agencies
at the district level.

Karnataka Human Development Report 2005

Further, there is a need to ensure that the
planning process is free from any kind of state
intervention. In fact, with a view to making it
more relevant and strong, the Working Group on
Decentralisation (March 2002) holds the view
that the planning process should move away
from sectoral planning to a system of integrated
area planning.

PRIs and civil society
Owing to the critical problems associated with the
public service delivery system such as inefficiency,
poor resources, and lack of adequate citizen
participation there has emerged a consensus for
public-private partnership to promote an efficient
and effective service delivery system. This has
brought into focus the institution of civil society,
which is supposed to demand better performance
and accountability, and monitor public service
provisioning.
The term ‘civil society’ embraces a large number
of institutions outside the state, such as capitalist
market institutions, religious institutions, private
and public associations, all forms of cooperative
social relationships, and political parties (C. Jeffry
Alexander, 1998). We will look at only a few aspects
of civil society, which can have a meaningful
interface with decentralised governments such
as non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and
community based organisations (CBOs). These
institutions/organisations have the potential to
support and strengthen decentralised governments
and work with them as partners. They can play a
role in revitalising decentralised governments at
three levels: motivating people to participate in the
decision-making process, providing information
to people on various aspects of local government
and planning, and providing inputs on attitudinal
changes, for example, with regard to reservations
for weaker sections. They can provide inputs to
both elected members and the bureaucracy (Abdul
Aziz, 1999).
A three-state study covering Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu holds the view that NGOs
and CBOs had no role at all in PRI functioning or
implementation. The NGO-panchayat partnership
did not flower because of mutual suspicion about

motives. As for people’s organisations such as
Mahila Mandals and youth clubs, the study notes
that they ‘hardly find a common ground to work
with panchayats. Both of them are content with
organising sports and cultural activities during
national and state festivals taking financial
assistance from panchayats’ (Abdul Aziz, 2002).
A different perspective does exist, however. One
writer says ‘The NGOs in Karnataka were dubious
towards the new decentralised political structure
in the beginning (they however) were forced to
redefine their rules because PRIs have become
part of the structure within which NGOs have to
work, and structural changes in PRIs are aimed at
people-centered rural development, which is also
the objective of many of the NGOs’ (Susanne Dam
Hansen, 1999: 79-80). As part of this change,
NGOs in Karnataka are reported to have supported
PRIs, both during pre- and post-election periods.
During the pre-election period they have enabled
women and the underprivileged to contest
elections and provided them with moral support.
During the post-election period, they have
promoted capacity building among marginalised
people by giving them formal training (Susanne
Dam Hansen, 1999: Alex Tuscano, 1999.
It is clear that though civil society has immense
potential to work as a partner with local bodies,
so far it has played a limited role in terms of
interacting with PRIs. This could, in part, be
due to the reluctance of NGOs and people’s
organisations to work with the local leadership
on the one hand and the cautious attitude
of the panchayat functionaries towards the
intentions of certain civil society organisations
on the other.

NGOs and CBOs have the
potential to support and
strengthen decentralised
governments and work
with them as partners.
They can play a role in
revitalising decentralised
governments at three
levels: motivating people
to participate in the
decision-making process,
providing information to
people on various aspects
of local government and
planning, and providing
inputs on attitudinal
changes.

Conclusions
The PRI system has been steadily evolving in the
state and there are constant efforts to ensure that
the powers of the Panchayat Raj bodies are not
eroded and more functions are devolved to them
in accordance with the letter and spirit of the
Constitution. Constraints that prevent PRIs from
optimising their performance have been discussed
above. However, even given these constraints, PRIs
have not prioritised human development goals in
265

Institutional Reforms for Human Development: Panchayat Raj

PRIs have not prioritised
human development
goals in their wish lists.
More capacity building,
inclusion of human
development goals in
district sector plans
backed by funds and
sustained monitoring
of HD objectives would
contribute significantly to
improving HD outcomes,
in north Karnataka in
particular.

their wish lists. More capacity building, inclusion
of human development goals in district sector
plans backed by funds and sustained monitoring
of HD objectives would contribute significantly
to improving HD outcomes, in north Karnataka
in particular. The new arena of intervention is
the village, and gram panchayats have created
formidable databases that will underpin HD
planning and monitoring at the grassroots. Gram
panchayats are perfectly positioned to ensure that
all children remain in school and that all births are
institutional births. Such initiatives could improve
literacy rates, and reduce IMR and MMR very
visibly. The state’s role should be primarily, as a
resource centre, rather than an enforcer. In that
respect, Karnataka has moved steadily towards
ensuring greater autonomy for PRIs. Hopefully
this will promote more participatory governance
and better HD outcomes over the next decade.











Recommendations


266



With the state having initiated so many
measures to devolve more powers to
PRIs, the next step should be efficient
operationalisation of these measures;



Human development objectives should
be incorporated in District Plans and the
outcomes monitored;
Increases in district Annual Plan outlays
should not be distributed on a pro-rata basis
to districts. Instead, districts with poor human
and economic development indicators should
receive more resources;
Increase untied funds to districts with very
low human development indicators (HDI)
(primarily, the Hyderabad Karnataka area);
Strengthen District Planning Committees by
building capacity;
Provide planning infrastructure to taluk
panchayats;
Strengthen Gram Panchayats by providing
managerial and technical assistance to
enable them to perform more effectively;
Gram Panchayats should increase their
resource base through mobilisation of taxes.
Government could award incentives to gram
panchayats that perform well; and
Build capacity in community based
organisations so that they can function as
effective agents of change.

